# Transcriptional Profile of Mammalian Cardiac Regeneration with mRNA-Seq

In this project, we downloaded, QC-ed, processed, and analyzed sequencing data that was generated by O’Meara et al. to better understand how neonatal mice are able to regenerate their heart tissue but lose this ability later in development. The analysis we are attempting to replicate can be found here:

O’Meara et al. Transcriptional Reversion of Cardiac Myocyte Fate During Mammalian Cardiac Regeneration. Circ Res. Feb 2015. PMID: 25477501

Our goals for this project were to:
1. Download and extract sequencing reads from publicly available mRNA-Seq datasets
2. Understand the most common short read sequencing file formats and which available tools are useful in analyzing sequencing data
3. Align and normalize sequencing reads to an appropriate genome using the tuxedo suite of short read mapping tools
4. Compute and evaluate quality control metrics for sequencing datasets
5. Examine differential expression identified with cuffdiff and interpret the results using DAVID

## Contributors
* Daisy Wenyan Han daisyhan@bu.edu
* Divya Sundaresan divyas3@bu.edu
* Alec Jacobsen aggjacob@bu.edu
* Emmanuel Saake esaake@bu.edu

## Repository Contents
* __quality_control_metrics__ - fastq files processed, and quality metrics extracted using fastQC tool. Directory contains quality metrics obtained for the GSM1570702 sample from the GEO Series GSE64403 dataset.
* __analysis.R__ - Utilizes differential expression statistics generated by file above to compare postnatal day 0 (PO) vs Adult conditions. Identifies top up- and down- regulated significant genes. Utilizes David Function Annotation Clustering to identify most enriched biological pathways.
* __biologist_analysis.R__ - Analyze contents of the FPKM expression matrices for biological patterns. Generates table of FC for genes highlighted in the original O'Meara et al. paper, and augmented table of enriched biological pathways, as well as clustered heatmap of FPKM values using top 1000 DE genes identified by file above.

## Data Availability
Data is accessible at NCBI GEO database (O’Meara et al., 2013), accession GSE64403.

